Well, Scribner, Dave Randall used to sell rare books at Scribner's in New York.
That's right.
And then he wrote that book, Dukedom Large Enough.
Exactly.
Which you have a quote from right over there.
You have that Shakespeare quote from The Tempest, which comes right after Dukedom Large Enough.
At any rate, he tells the story.
In those days, you know, they weren't selling books.
People didn't queue up to buy books.
He took a suitcase full of books and went to call on Hogan, who was a lawyer, and who had saved Mr. Doheny, whose library, his wife's library was auctioned in 87.
From Tipar Dome.
He had saved Mr. Doheny from going to jail.
And Mrs. Doheny sent him a book and told him that he ought to collect books.
He was a very great trial lawyer.
and President of the American Bar Association, etc.
And he became a book collector.
And Dave Randall called on him to sell him some books with a suitcase for him.
He was busy.
So he went into the men's room, Randall did, and was voiding.
When the voice came over the speaker system, Mr. Hogan will now see Mr. Randall.
He was so excited.
This is the 30s.
He couldn't find buyers.
So he runs into Frank Hogan's office, and the first thing that Hogan says to him, Randall, I'm not accustomed to having men walk into my office when my secretary is sitting here with their fly open.
That put Randall into terror.
He began to butt his fly.
He didn't know what to do.
He said, what do you want?
He said, I want to sell you some books, Mr. Hogan.
He showed him a couple of books.
He said, how much you want for this book?
The guy, Scribner told him, so much.
And he said, I'm not going to pay that.
I'll pay so-and-so.
And Randall says, OK, you're going to have for so-and-so.
And they began their relationship.
So when they became friends, Hogan said that he'd like him to see
a Mark, a Huckleberry Finn manuscript that he had given to Georgetown, where he'd gone to school, the law school, nights.
So he takes Dave Randall, Dave, I wanted to see it.
They go over to the library, and he asked, Hogan asked the librarian where the manuscript is, and she says it's in the basement, section C, shelf four, gives him all the descriptions.
So he and Randall go down, and they're lying on the floor, wrapped with a piece of twine, gathering dust, is this Huckleberry Finn manuscript.
Whereupon Hogan turns to Randall and he says, Dave, that settles it.
I was going to give my books to Georgetown.
They're not going to Georgetown.
They're going to be sold so that other people who can take care of them and love them like I do,
will happen.
That's exactly what he said in his will, too.
He said it almost exactly in those words.
That's it.
He lived by what he said in his will.
And that's why, in answer to your question, I would like someone else who loves books as much as I do and loves these books as much as I do, to have them, to take care of them.
You know, I'm only a tenant.
That's all any of us are.
We're a short-term tenant.
I have a lease on them.
That's all.
and let someone else enjoy them and preserve them, protect them.
Now Alice and other librarians don't like when you say this because they feel that everything belongs in an institutional library.
I don't agree.
I think that institutional libraries can have much of this material without necessarily having fragile first editions.
For example, I received a call from Warren Howell once.
Would you like to buy a Burns
in boards, in rappers.
A very rare book in rappers.
You know, the Kilmarnock Burns.
Very rare.
I have one in contemporary binding with the book plate of the patron of Burns.
That should be pretty rare, too, actually.
Yes, it is.
It is.
And with the book plate of Burns' patron.
But rappers, I said, yes.
They said, it'll cost, I know, $25,000 or something.
I said, okay.
Howell's calling me from New York, and I'm going to have this book.
Apparently this book, along with a large number of other very fine books, was left to the University of Chicago by a man named Shaffner, who was a banker, retired investment banker, originally from Chicago, went, lived in San Francisco, bought a lot of stuff from Warren Howell.
That's how Warren happened to know him and know the content of his library.
And Warren says to me, it's now at the University of Chicago, but they don't need a book like that.
That belongs to a collector.
That's in wrappers, he said.
And I think that they'll sell it for this amount.
They could use the money.
I said, you've got a deal.
Well, Bob Rosenthal, God rest his soul, who might have said yes to Warren Howell, did not mean it.
So I called up Bob, whom I knew.
And I said, you're a walsher.
I want that book.
You don't need it.
I was joking with him, of course.
I says, you don't need it in the library.
You can get any Kilmarnock.
A book and wrappers belongs to a collector.
I think so.
And it doesn't belong to a library.
You're not going to let anyone handle it.
You may as well give it to someone like myself or sell it to someone and use the money for whatever you need to fund other purchasers.
No, he wasn't going to sell it.
He changed his mind, and Warren was sick about this, because he had plugged in a ten percent commission for himself, which was fine.
But Rosenthal said, if you come down to the university, I will buy your lunch at the Quadriangle Club, and then I'll let you handle the book.
That was my consolation prize.
That was your consolation prize.
He was a good bookman.
Yeah, he was.
No, I'm talking about Rosenthal at the University of Chicago.
Oh, how do you think about that?
Oh, yeah, Randall did, and he made the Lilly.
And, you know, even though he didn't have a librarian's degree in library science, Lilly said, either you hire Dave Randall or you don't get my books.
So the university had to modify or ignore its rule that he would never, unless a person had, I think, a PhD at the very least, in library science or master's degree,
They hired Randall, who didn't have any degree in him, to be the librarian.
He was very good.
Very.
And then Bill Cagle out there is wonderful, too.
You know Bill Cagle?
He's quite a good guy.
Yeah, I know Bill.
I'm really looking forward to seeing your library in there.
Any other questions you want to ask me about this room, or anything else?
I think we've covered it, and there'll be other questions that come up as we go along, and I'll get them.
Okay.
of salivating about the books.
It's just nothing, really.
I mean, to me, it's hard to use with me.
I'm opinionated, and look what it says here.
I'm not always right, but I'm never wrong.
Okay.
I'm going to go sit at the throne.
Look at this.
It's marvelous.
Okay.
Yes, wow.
I've got my glasses.
Look at that.
My God, I really do feel like I'm sitting in a
Oh, Abel, this is really wonderful.
Well, you want to start with some 15th century books?
Oh, yeah, this is just... What would you like to see in the 15th?
Let me, well, here, let me... This is really exciting.
Here's a book I bought from... Who did I buy this book from?
Oh, this is wonderful.
I bought this from Larry Whitten, who is a great bookseller.
This is the Cologne Chronicle.
Go ahead, lay it down.
Okay.
That's a clam shell.
And there's a mention here, the first mention of John Gutenberg, who had developed the process of printing from movable metal types.
Take it out, take it out.
Don't be afraid.
It won't eat you.
Look at this binding.
Original pigskin.
The clasps.
Yeah, the boss isn't the clasps intact.
Oh, my God.
Oh, this is wonderful.
Look at the binding.
You really do get a feeling when you... That's what brings you into connection with the book, when you can handle it, look at it.
Go ahead, take us through it.
I am, I'm just, I want to start again.
That's contemporary coloring, by the way.
It's really quite, the binding is quite extraordinary.
Where did this come from?
Larry Whitney.
I know, but prior to that, we don't know.
I don't know what the provenance is.
I'm just going to go to the colophon.
Oh, look at this, see?
Somebody actually did some, wrote some stuff in here, back here.
Well, you're talking, I was thinking of the program.
I know.
I know, but I'm just... Now, when it's red, is that a second pass through the press, or is that hand colored, that red, would you say?
It's done by hand.
Yeah.
You think all of this is done by hand?
No, no, no.
The rubrication, are you talking about the rubrication?
That's right, yeah.
The rubrication is usually done by hand.
It is, okay.
Go ahead and page through it.
Look at some of the contemporary colored illustrations.
Wow.
Of course, I can't read the, this is German, right?
Of course.
It's magnificent.
It really is.
But you only dream of owning a book like this.
You only dream about owning a book like this, I suppose.
Look at the gorgeous illustrations.
I can't believe how tight it is, how tight the binding is.
You're almost afraid to handle it.
That book has survived for over 500 years.
You don't have to worry about it.
Has it been repaired over the years, do you think?
Not to my knowledge.
So that is the original
to the best of my knowledge.
Wow.
And the way I look at it, it doesn't look like it.
It looks like it has not been touched.
Even the clasps are... The bosses of the clasps?
Yeah.
The bosses are these things here, and these are the clasps.
You must look at the illustrations.
That's where the beauty is.
It's very coloring.
And there's no foxing at all.
What did we title this?
This is the Cologne Chronicle.
The Cologne Chronicle.
The story of the history of the world.
The history of the world.
And it predates the Nuremberg Chronicle, I would assume, right?
Nuremberg was 1493.
Right.
This is what the... I was looking for it.
Doesn't it say that?
But look at the coliform.
I was looking for it.
In the back I couldn't find it.
I didn't think it predated it, but it could.
What does the colophon say?
I can't find it.
This should be the colophon right here, right?
Let me get my glasses.
Is there any book at all, do you ever get like a hankering to hold a particular book?
All of them.
I get a hankering to hold them all.
Now this is in a modern binding.
It's the Katana copy.
It's a fairly scarce book.
It's the Dante, 1481, with the Landini commentary.
And it has two illustrations after the most important
illustrator of the 15th century.
Now is this paper here, are these sheets more modern?
They're new, obviously.
When I say new, you know what I mean.
So you see, this was printed within about 200 years of the actual writing of the poem.
This was printed about 200 years of the actual writing.
About 1250, wasn't it?
This is 1481.
Yeah, so it's 260 years or so.
Oh, this is wonderful.
Is it in the Tietzarima?
It must be in the original.
There are two.
Two illustrations after Botticelli.
There should be two.
It's quite a rare book.
I would think so.
What is this, commentary here?
Yeah, the Landini commentary to the poetry.
But it has the original.
There's the other.
Did you see that other facet?
No.
There you go.
Quite wonderful.
You like it?
Yeah.
It's really thrilling.
It was an important part of Renaissance.
Yeah.
Well, after all, this is
coming out of the Middle Ages.
And where was this printed?
It was printed in Florence.
Florence.
So it's his home, Florence.
It was done in Florence.
Yeah.
Firenze.
That's right.
Here's another wonderful and suitable here, which I love.
It's Plutarch.
Plutarch's Lives.
But what makes it particularly
aside from the fact that it's an Intunable from 1478, is that it is printed by Jensen, who, as you know, is one of the great printers.
There are two vowels to it.
The binding is probably 18th century.
Not contemporary, but 18th century.
That is so pretty nice.
So smooth, it was almost like... 18th century cat.
Look at the marbling here.
You feel the paper is... Well, then, Magnuson, listen to you.
Aren't they beautiful?
Look at those chapter headings.
It could have been done yesterday, huh?
Yeah.
Just so beautifully illuminated.
Oh.
Oh, my God.
And there are people who would strip these out of the books.
Oh, yeah.
Sure.
That is, you talk about a treasure that's just kept between the covers of the book.
As I told Bob, when Bob Cotner was here, I said to me, this is a typographic monument.
It's more than a very important book, which it is in itself.
Plutarch's lives being a very important part.
And Shakespeare drew on Plutarch's lives.
As you know.
Very heavily, yeah.
Very heavily.
But it was printed by Jensen and beautifully illuminated, and I think that it makes it very special.
Do we ever know who the illuminators are?
Yes, I did know at one time, but I pleaded.
But at least their names have been preserved someplace along the way.
Oh.
Each chapter is illuminated like that.
If you page, you fan through the pages.
I'm not going to fan.
Fan through the pages.
You get a feel.
Don't worry.
It's been here 500 years.
It'll last.
Oh, my God.
You think of the paper they use.
It's all linen those days.
Today they've used wood pulp and the damn thing falls apart and turns.
Well, people actually made paper.
They were, they were.
Oh, sure.
You have to fan through them in order to get the picture.
Okay.
I hate to fan through.
Look at this.
That had to have been done by hand, wouldn't you think?
Of course.
There are other illuminations like that at the beginning of each chapter.
Okay, I just have to be very careful.
This must have been done for somebody very special, right?
Somebody had, whoever this was done for, this was not something you could go in and buy at a bookstore.
I mean, this had to be, I'm sure this was commissioned.
Probably.
I don't know the providence, but probably.
There are other illuminations in there.
I know I'm trying to find them without, forgive me for being cautious.
Take your time.
I can't believe the condition of this.
I can't find that.
What's the best way to fan this without hurting it?
Just the way you'd fan any book.
That's right.
Like this, right?
Mm-hmm.
I want to see another one of those illuminations.
There are other illuminations.
Maybe they're in this volume.
Yeah, perhaps they're in this volume.
Look at this.
In some cases, they're not printed.
In some, they're not printed.
You know, some people didn't do it.
But I love that, too.
But that tells you something as well, doesn't it?
Isn't that something?
You have to have patience to find these illuminations because they're there.
See, many of them here, look at this volume, because it's easier to find them in this volume.
There are about a dozen in each one.
Look at this one.
Venice, Jensen, January 2nd, 1478.
Two volumes, folio, cap binding of the 18th century, gold fillets on sides, paneled backs, marble edges.
It's absolutely magnificent.
You're holding it right.
I'm glad you're holding it as you do.
Oh, I would.
Protecting the covers.
It doesn't get you sick when you see people open a book.
No.
Makes you sick.
It scares you and it terrifies you.
I'm amazed you're trusting me with this.
Well, you're a bookman.
Oh, God, Abel.
The infinite patience it must have taken to do something.
Not to hand paint.
They mix their own colors, you know.
And that's real gold.
Oh, sure.
They use regular gold leaf and they mix their old colors.
And the blue is usually a lapis that they crushed.
Oh, look at that.
It's absolutely magnificent.
Absolutely magnificent.
I will not be happy to look at least a half dozen of those illuminations.
I know, I know.
I just want to do this in a very careful manner.
There are markers there that you can see.
You see the markers?
Oh, I see.
Sure.
Okay.
That's...
Oh, my God!
Look at that.
You know, this is a case in history where the first is the best.
It is reputed, said to be the most beautiful,
Pistachypnoidomarchy politically is reputed to be the most beautiful 15th-century book based on the typography, the illustrations, the paper, and the marriage of the paper, the typography, and the illustrations.
And it was printed by whom?
It was printed by Aldus in 1499.
So this is an Aldean.
Aldean.
And it's the story of a monk who fell desperately in love with a woman that he couldn't fulfill his love.
Obviously, right.
And so in his frustration, he wrote this, allegedly, this book, which psychiatrists now buy the books because they think there's some deep psychoanalytic meanings to it.
But it is a beautiful book.
How many Aldeans do you have?
You were saying earlier that Kim Brooker has
arguably the finest.
He's an all-dean collector.
I am not.
But you buy the things that you want.
I buy whatever I want.
I'm not an all-dean collector.
Ah, but look at this.
Now this is H-Y-P-N-E-R.
Hypnermachia polyphily.
I know, I just want to spell it.
The love of the... Hypnermachia, M-A-C-H-I-A, P-O-L-I-P-H-I-L-I.
The strife of love and a dream.
Take off the sleeve.
Oh, I'm sorry.
That's all right.
This is done by the French binders.
You know, they're always more, the French are always more elaborate than either the Germans or the English.
Now, what's the date of this binding, would you say?
What is the date?
Yeah, I mean, not the date, but how old is this binding?
Probably turn of the century.
Yeah.
It's quite wonderful.
The French binders are, you know,
The French, the difference in style is that the English like to leave this, there's in the original boards if they can, if it's a book that was published in boards, or can't.
The French like everything rebound.
What makes this supposedly the most beautiful book?
Just the consensus of those who do printing and illustration,
are the ones who believe that this is the most beautiful book that was printed in the fifteenth century.
I would say that it is generally so acknowledged, not just by me, because I'm no authority on anything.
Look at the woodpets.
Wonderful.
It's a beautiful label.
It's really quite...
the engravings.
Is this something that Fleming calls and says he has?
No.
Is it something you say you're looking for?
So how does it, what happens?
I dropped in on a Friday afternoon and I said, what have you got for me?
He says, look around.
I looked around.
He says, you know, Abel, you remind me of Blue Silver.
And I said, why?
He says, you have the same nose for books that he did.
I wish that were true.
I wish that what he said
It had been true, because Silver had the most magnificent judgment when it came to books.
As profane a man as he was, when he came to books, he was in a class by himself.
But that was Fleming's way of flattering me, that I would pick the important books.
And he never offered me a book, except the text, which I will show you later.
Fleming never offered you a book.
You know, he never called up and said, Abel, I've got this book.
Are you interested?"
He would say, well look around, see what you want.
Did he call you if he hadn't heard from you in a while?
No, never.
Well, of course you probably kept in touch anyway.
We weren't touched on a regular basis.
But he wouldn't deign to call up a customer and tell them, you ought to come in, I've just— Because they haven't heard from you in a while.
Not a word.
You stopped collecting— If he had never heard from me, he would have just said goodbye.
Really?
And yet he was a good friend in his own fashion, faithful to me in his own fashion, as they say in Fair Lady.
That's wonderful.
I return this to your— Put the sleeve on.
Put the sleeve on.
Yes, sir.
You said you have a few books in manuscript, but clearly
your primary interest is in printed books.
Printed books.
And you seem to have a particular taste for illustrated books as well.
Of the 63 Intunables, about maybe 15 or 20 are illustrated.
The others are not.
They're just important books.
Like with Lessing Rosenwald, everything had to be illustrated.
Everything had to be illustrated.
But again, you're more aquatic.
I'm no Rosenwald.
You're talking about... Oh, don't, don't, don't.
No, he's a prince.
You're talking about people.
I'm just a little nobody.
Rosenwald, Bradley Martin, Garden Limited.
You're talking about another world altogether.
For one thing, they collected when I wasn't even around.
This is a fascinating book.
I'll take this.
Go ahead.
Start again.
Let me tell you what you said.
Fleming originally had sold me the first, second, third, and fourth folios over a period of years.
And my original first folio had, I don't know, seven or eight or nine leaves, in fact, similarly, including the title page and including the leaf of verses.
It was a tall copy, however, and I always wanted this.
And he always said, I'm not going to sell them to you.
You mean this copy?
These four.
Four folios.
which he had purchased in 1961 at Sotheby's in London.
He bought these four folios that you looked at in London in 1961.
The first folio, of which they have an accurate record, had been owned by Alan Pulliston in 1744.
Who owned it before, we do not know.
Alan Pulliston married into John Dryden's family, and the first folio, which is what I'm talking about now, only the first folio, remained in John Dryden's family until 1913.
Wow.
In 1913, his signature, by the way, is at the back, pastedown, both Alan Pulliston and John Dryden.
In 1913—
In 1913... Excuse me.
There it is.
There it is, right there.
I see it.
Scored out.
In 1913, they sold the first folio to Bernard Quaritch.
Wow.
Quaritch, in turn, he was also like Grosenbach.
He didn't sell.
You bought from him what you wanted if he had it and he was willing to give it to you.
Roosevelt purchased it from Bernard Quaritch in 1913, then sold the book to a commodore Mortimer Plant, P-L-A-N-T, who was a very successful businessman in New York on Fifth Avenue.
He was going to make a big collector out of Mortimer Plant.
Okay?
Mm-hmm.
Mortimer Plant decided he didn't want to own any books, so he sold them back after a while, I don't know how many years, to Dr. Rosenbach.
Rosenbach then sold the books to Frank Brewer Bemis in Boston, who was a great collector, as you know, probably one of the finest collectors we had during that period, who kept the books.
He assembled the second, third, and fourth.
He bought the first from Rosenbach, and then from Rosenbach bought the second, third, and fourth over a period of years.
He died in 1935.
Frank Brewer Beamster.
And now, of course, they would have been sending it to Sotheby's or Christie's.
Oh, for sure.
In those days, they sold it back to the dealer, who was, of course, Rosenbach.
He had sold it to them.
He bought it back in 1935.
He then proceeded to sell, because now there are four folios, not just the first, because Bemis had assembled through Rosenbach the second, third, and fourth.
He now proceeds to sell.
I'll answer the door.
I think that's there.
To Morris Wolfe, who is the father of Edwin Wolfe II.
Edwin Wolfe is then the manager of Rosenbach's.
I'll get the book.
Okay.
They are purchased at auction by John Fleming for Marjorie Newton, who is going to give them to Bryn Mawr.
Or is it Carolyn Newton?
Carolyn Newton.
I'm sorry.
You're right.
It's Carolyn, not Marjorie.
But as her brother Swiftie told me, she was a bitch of bitches, Swiftie Newton.
And she has a fight with the people at Britmore and decides to sell them back to Fleming.
Fleming keeps them for himself until he, out of necessity, is obliged to sell them because he
needs to buy the apartment in which he has his business.
So fortuitously, I was there at the right time.
And I guess he remembers I'd nagged him so much about it.
When you come back again, I will take you through some of the other.
I would love to.
I've got a marvelous copy of The Fairy Queen that you'll see and others here with great covenants.
What time am I talking tomorrow?
What time is the Caxton event tomorrow?
I think it's what's the Caxton event, the Caxton Club event tomorrow is what time?
We'll get together at 5 o'clock for cocktails.
Oh, wonderful.
I'm sorry I didn't feed you, give you anything to drink, but I wasn't going to do it.
You nourished me.
You fed me in ways that will last forever.
Steve, I'll be right with you, okay?
This is going to be a very rare book with the autograph of the author.
Oh, come on.
I cannot tell you how much I enjoyed it.
You're going to enjoy the next one, too, because you'll be in the next one.
Really?
My biggest depth is of the 18th century.
You don't mind if I sign a nick?
Put an X down.
You're going to be signing a lot of them tomorrow, I suspect.
My pleasure.
The date today is the... Today is the... 14th.
14th.
I'm sure it's...
Yeah, it's the 14th.
Thank you, Abel.